JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff. GWEN IFILL: And
I'm Gwen Ifill. JUDY WOODRUFF:
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Chicago's mayor fires the city's
police superintendent, amidst
protests and calls for change
after video of an officer
killing a black teen. GWEN
IFILL: Also ahead this Tuesday:
ramping up the fight. The U.S.
expands use of special forces in
Iraq and Syria to combat ISIS.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And our special
look at Nigeria's pain and
promise continues: how an
economic boom leaves much of the
country in poverty. FELIX MORKA,
Activist: There's no potable
water. There's no access to
health care, primary health
care. The schools are completely
private. There's no official
presence in Makoko. GWEN IFILL:
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour." (BREAK) GWEN
IFILL: World leaders left Paris
today, and negotiators got down
to the hard work of finishing a
landmark climate change accord.
President Obama was among those
departing after a final call to
action. BARACK OBAMA, President
of the United States: I am
convinced that we are going to
get big things done here. GWEN
IFILL: At an afternoon news
conference, the president
sounded optimistic about the
summit's chances. BARACK OBAMA:
If you had said to people as
recently as two years ago that
we'd have 180 countries showing
up in Paris with pretty
ambitious targets for carbon
reduction, most people would
have said, you're crazy, that's
a pipe dream. And yet here we
are. That's already happened.
GWEN IFILL: Even so, climate
scientists warn it will take
much larger reductions to stop
the Earth's warming trend.
Another sticking point is
finding the money to help poor
nations adapt. Today, Mr. Obama,
a native of Hawaii who lived for
a time in Indonesia, met with
leaders of Pacific island
nations whose very existence is
threatened by rising sea levels.
BARACK OBAMA: As weather
patterns change, we might deal
with tens of millions of climate
refugees from the Asian Pacific
region, and as I mentioned to my
friends around the table, I am
an island boy. I grew up on an
island, and understand both the
beauty, but also the fragility
of island ecosystems. GWEN
IFILL: Meanwhile, African
leaders talked to French
President Francois Hollande
about threats their countries
face, ranging from the spreading
Sahara Desert to dwindling water
supplies. AKINWUMI ADESINA,
President, African Development
Bank: Africa, the least emitter
of greenhouse gases in the
world, now suffers the most from
climate change. Others pollute.
Africa pays, and pays dearly.
Lake Chad is almost gone, and
the sand dunes are encroaching
the Sahel. GWEN IFILL: Hollande
announced today that France will
send more than $8 billion to
Africa for development of
renewable energy and electrical
access. But the Paris meeting's
success will ultimately be
judged by how far a final deal
goes and how effective it can be
without mandatory enforcement.
President Obama acknowledged as
much at his news conference.
BARACK OBAMA: What we seek is an
agreement where progress paves
the way for countries to update
their emissions targets on a
regular basis and each nation
has the confidence that other
nations are meeting their
commitments. GWEN IFILL: Still,
as the president flew back to
Washington, House Republicans
called for action to reject his
Clean Power Plan. House Speaker
Paul Ryan: REP. PAUL RYAN
(R-WI), Speaker of the House: I
don't think we're out of step
with public opinion wanting
jobs, wanting economic growth,
weighing the costs and the
benefits. And I think when you
weigh the cost and the benefits
against these so-called legally
binding obligations, they don't
add up. GWEN IFILL: The House
votes on a Republican energy
bill later this week. The White
House has already threatened a
veto. And this evening, House
Republicans did push through
resolutions opposing EPA limits
on carbon dioxide emissions from
power plants. JUDY WOODRUFF: In
the day's other news, Chicago
Mayor Rahm Emanuel fired police
Superintendent Garry McCarthy
today over the killing of a
black teenager. Video released
last week showed Laquan McDonald
being shot 16 times by a white
officer in October of 2014.
Today, the mayor said the police
department needs -- quote --
"fresh eyes and new leadership."
RAHM EMANUEL (D), Mayor of
Chicago: Any case of excessive
force or abuse of authority
undermines the entire force and
the trust we must build with
every community in the city.
Police officers are only as
effective as if they are trusted
by all Chicagoans, whoever they
are and wherever they live in
the city. JUDY WOODRUFF:
Meanwhile, Jason Van Dyke, the
officer involved in the
shooting, has been charged with
first-degree murder. And late
today, the Illinois state
attorney general called for a
federal civil rights
investigation of the Chicago
police. We will examine what led
to today's firing later in the
program. GWEN IFILL: A federal
trial has been delayed again for
Dylann Roof, accused of killing
nine black church members in
Charleston, South Carolina. A
judge postponed it for the third
time today, giving the defense
more time to review thousands of
pages of evidence. Roof faces
federal charges of hate crimes
and firearms violations. A trial
on murder charges, in state
court, is set for next July.
JUDY WOODRUFF: More bloodshed in
the Middle East today. The
Israeli military says troops
shot and killed two more
Palestinians in attempted
stabbings. Both attacks happened
in the West Bank, but hours
apart. The army didn't say how
close the attackers, a man and a
woman, got to their targets.
Since mid-September, 19 Israelis
and at least 100 Palestinians
have died in the ongoing
violence. GWEN IFILL: The number
of refugees fleeing to Europe by
sea fell last month for the
first time this year. The U.N.
Refugee Agency says the number
was roughly 140,000, down from
220,000 in October. It cited
turbulent seas and Turkish
action against smugglers. But
thousands have arrived on Greek
islands this week alone, many of
them among the most vulnerable.
SARAH CROWE, Spokesperson,
UNICEF: The numbers of women and
children continue to climb,
which is for us, quite honestly,
something of a surprise, and we
can only assume that this is a
sense of the desperation that
families are going through. When
you take your whole family with
you, it means you don't have
schools for your children, you
don't have proper shelter, you
have no sense of what lies
ahead. GWEN IFILL: The U.N.
estimates more than one million
migrants and refugees will enter
Europe this year. JUDY WOODRUFF:
Investigators in Indonesia say
they have determined why an
AirAsia jetliner crashed last
December, killing all 162 on
board. They said today that a
recurring problem with the
rudder control system, and
miscommunication among the crew,
brought the plane down. Search
teams had to recover the
wreckage from the Java Sea after
the crash. They also found the
black box flight recorders that
helped explain what happened.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, there's word the number
of Americans with newly
diagnosed diabetes is falling
after decades of rising. The
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention reports cases fell by
about one-fifth from 2008 to
2014 to 1.4 million. Experts say
they're not sure what's causing
the drop, but better eating
habits could be a factor. JUDY
WOODRUFF: Ceremonies in
Montgomery, Alabama, today
marked a seminal moment in the
civil rights movement. It was 60
years ago that Rosa Parks
refused to give up her seat on a
segregated bus and triggered a
boycott. The commemorations
focused on the Baptist church
where Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
led the boycott. Democratic
presidential candidate Hillary
Clinton was among the speakers,
along with Alabama Congresswoman
Terri Sewell. REP. TERRI SEWELL
(D), Alabama: We're here not
only to celebrate 60 years, but
to know that in order for us to
get 60 years further down the
way, we must do our part. We
must do our part. You know, the
price of freedom is never free.
It has been paid for by the
blood and tears of so many, and
all of us know that we get to
stand because Rosa refused to
sit. JUDY WOODRUFF: Rosa Parks
died in 2005, at the age of 92.
GWEN IFILL: Facebook chief
executive Mark Zuckerberg
announced the birth of a
daughter today and a huge new
charity. Zuckerberg said he and
his wife, Priscilla Chan, will
give away nearly all of their
Facebook stock, valued at $45
billion. They will focus on
fighting disease, improving
education and reducing poverty.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In economic news,
U.S. auto sales hit a 14-year
high last month, thanks to major
holiday discounts. That data,
plus better economic indicators
from Europe and Japan, went down
well on Wall Street. The Dow
Jones industrial average gained
168 points to close at 17888.
The Nasdaq rose 47 points. And
the S&P 500 added 22. GWEN
IFILL: And starting today, menus
at chain restaurants in New York
City will carry a warning about
salt. A salt shaker emblem will
note menu items that have more
than 2,300 milligrams of sodium.
That's the daily limit many
nutritionists recommend, about
one teaspoon of salt. It's the
first such rule in the country.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
boosting special forces in Iraq
and Syria; the birth of Africa's
largest economy; Chicago's
police chief fired; and much
more. JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S.
strategy against the Islamic
State, also known as ISIS or
ISIL, came in for some direct
questions today before the House
Armed Services Committee, as the
U.S. announced that more forces
will be heading to Iraq to fight
the extremist group. Pentagon
leaders came to the hearing with
a response to calls to do more
against the Islamic State.
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense
Secretary: In full coordination
with the government of Iraq,
we're deploying a specialized
expeditionary targeting force to
assist Iraqi and Kurdish
Peshmerga forces. JUDY WOODRUFF:
Defense Secretary Ash Carter
said the force will be larger
than 50, and be authorized to
take direct action, including
combat. ASHTON CARTER: These
special operators will, over
time, be able to conduct raids,
free hostages, gather
intelligence and capture ISIL
leaders. This force will also be
in a position to conduct
unilateral operations in Syria.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. already
has 3,500 U.S. troops in Iraq,
supporting that country's
military, and a few dozen
special operations troops are
assigned to support local
fighters in Syria against ISIL.
Carter said today the U.S. is --
quote -- "at war," and the force
he announced is a new way of
achieving the objective. ASHTON
CARTER: We're actually eager to
do more, because that will
accelerate the defeat of ISIL.
But it hinges upon us finding
the capable local forces that we
can enable in this way. JUDY
WOODRUFF: A number of
Republicans have called for
sending in far more troops, but,
in Paris today, President Obama
again rejected that idea. BARACK
OBAMA, President of the United
States: For some reason, too
often in Washington, American
leadership is defined by whether
or not we're sending troops
somewhere. Where we strengthen
our relationships and influence
the most is when we are helping
to organize the world around a
particular problem. JUDY
WOODRUFF: Back at the hearing,
the country's top military
officer, Marine General Joseph
Dunford, acknowledged ISIL has
not been contained, but he said
stepped-up airstrikes are
cutting into the militants' oil
revenues. Even so, Ohio
Republican Michael Turner
challenged Secretary Carter on
claims of progress. REP. MICHAEL
TURNER (R), Ohio: Are we
winning, Mr. Secretary? ASHTON
CARTER: We will win. REP.
MICHAEL TURNER: Are we winning
now? ASHTON CARTER: We are going
to win. REP. MICHAEL TURNER:
Well, Mr. Secretary, I admit,
you know, most of us, on both
sides of the aisle, do not have
confidence that you have a
strategy, and you do not have a
strategy based on an accurate
assessment. I think your
presentation here today shows a
disconnect between what -- all
the information that we're
receiving, and really what's
being placed into the United
States' effort. JUDY WOODRUFF:
Meanwhile in Iraq, Shiite Muslim
militias warned they will attack
any new American force that
deploys there. For more, we turn
to the chairman of the Housed
Armed Services Committee,
Republican Mac Thornberry of
Texas. I spoke with him just a
short time ago. Welcome,
Chairman Mac Thornberry. Let me
begin by just asking, what is
your understanding now of these
additional steps the Obama
administration is going to be
taking in the fight against
ISIS? REP. MAC THORNBERRY (R),
Texas: Well, obviously, the
Obama administration is trying
to respond to Paris and other
terrorist attacks, so they label
these eight adaptations, because
they don't want to admit what
they have been doing so far is
not working, so these are
adaptations, slight changes to
what they have been doing and
they hope it's more successful.
You know, my fear is that it is
too much of a gradual approach
that is not really going to
change the conditions on the
ground or the ideological battle
in which ISIS is excelling. JUDY
WOODRUFF: Well, Secretary Carter
called it, I believe, a -- quote
-- "specialized expeditionary
targeting force." And we're
hearing reporting that it could
be as many as 200 troops or
more. Why do you think that's --
that could be inadequate? REP.
MAC THORNBERRY: Well, I do think
they're taking just step-by-step
sort of approach. So, people
have been calling for some time
about putting some of our folks
on the ground to help make
airstrikes more effective, and
that sounds like what the
secretary talked about today,
although he did say that they
could carry out raids and so
forth. But -- and if it is 200
people, then it is a small
fraction of what we once had,
for example, in just Iraq. So
that's the reason I think a
number of us are concerned that
the president is responding to
events, rather than trying to
figure out how to actually
degrade and destroy ISIS, and
then putting the resources
behind that. JUDY WOODRUFF:
Well, you have talked about the
need for the president to put a
four-star general in charge of
this somewhere in the region.
Are you saying that there's a
number of troops who should be
on the ground that the
administration hasn't agreed to
yet? REP. MAC THORNBERRY: No, I
don't get caught up in numbers.
What I get caught up in is a
strategy to actually succeed.
And my biggest fear is that what
we have seen and what we have
seen so far is that there's been
micromanagement from the White
House. You heard that testimony
today. There are 3,500 U.S.
troops in Iraq. If they want to
add 100, they have got to go all
the way to the president to get
his approval to add 25 or 100.
So it's that micromanagement
from the White House that is one
of the constraints on our
efforts. And so that's the
reason I say there needs to be a
four-star in the region in
charge, and he needs to have the
authority to be successful,
rather than run and ask mother
may I for every additional 25
troops that he thinks he needs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, speaking of
Iraq, Prime Minister Abadi said
late today that he doesn't
believe there should be any more
foreign troops in his country.
So, how do you reconcile that?
You're saying if the U.S.
believes it should send more
troops, it should. What about
the will of these sovereign
countries and their own leaders?
REP. MAC THORNBERRY: Well,
unfortunately, Iraq has become
more and more a proxy for Iran.
And so the country that is
putting lots of troops on the
ground, as well as directing the
Shiite militias, is their
neighbor Iran. And that
certainly makes things more
complicated. So, if we -- that's
the reason, for example, the
bill that Congress passed and
now the president has signed
would allow the president to
provide arms directly to the
Kurds, directly to the Sunni
tribes, rather than go through
the Baghdad government, because
Iran is increasingly calling the
shots there. JUDY WOODRUFF: As
you know, the administration,
Chairman Mac Thornberry, you
know the administration is
saying that this needs to be
done in coordination with the
countries in the region. Are you
saying that the U.S. should be
calling the shots, no matter
what the countries in the region
want? REP. MAC THORNBERRY: Oh,
of course not. But I also think
it is absolutely, as the former
Obama undersecretary of defense
for intelligence wrote about a
week ago, that the countries in
the region are not going to step
forward unless the U.S. takes a
decisive leadership role. So
it's a chicken and the egg. We
can't do it without them, and
they're not going to do it
unless they know we're
committed, and they know that
we're going to stay with the
mission. See, part of the
problem is the countries in the
region remember that we
abandoned Iraq in 2011 and that
has contributed been -- that has
contributed to this mess. So
they -- we have to earn their
trust back. And that's going to
take some time and effort. JUDY
WOODRUFF: But, in the end, who's
calling the shots? REP. MAC
THORNBERRY: Well, there is no
substitute for U.S. leadership.
Now, we need to do it with a
coalition. There needs to be
Muslims on the ground to help
carry this out. But nobody can
take the place of the United
States. And that's the reason
that I believe a four-star on
the ground in charge, empowered
to call the shots is really
needed to help focus these
efforts. JUDY WOODRUFF: And do
you have any sense the
administration is prepared to do
that? REP. MAC THORNBERRY: I
don't know. They -- they make
good noises about the authority
of the guy that they have
currently in Kuwait, and he's a
good guy. I don't take anything
away from him. What I worry
about, again, is the White House
aides micromanaging everything
that goes on there. We cannot
have a successful military
operation run from the basement
of the White House. JUDY
WOODRUFF: The chairman of the
House Armed Services Committee,
Congressman Mac Thornberry, we
thank you. REP. MAC THORNBERRY:
Thanks for having me. JUDY
WOODRUFF: And a note: We expect
to hear the Obama
administration's perspective
later this week. GWEN IFILL: We
return now to our continuing
series this week, "Nigeria: Pain
and Promise." Tonight, special
correspondent Nick Schifrin
looks at the country's massive
economic surge, new
millionaires, growing
inequality, and those fighting
to provide new opportunities for
all Nigerians. NICK SCHIFRIN: In
Africa today, for the young, the
hip, the rich, there's no better
place than Lagos. TOLA ADEAGBO,
Designer: Nigeria's just the
place to be right now in the
developing world. NICK SCHIFRIN:
Tola Adeagbo designs handbags
for Florian London.
Increasingly, her market is in
Lagos. This is the world's
fastest growing mega-city. TOLA
ADEAGBO: Any international
business, don't be shy of
Africa. There's no Boko Haram
anywhere, especially not in
Lagos. NICK SCHIFRIN: This is a
nation of superlatives, Africa's
largest population, richest
country, and fastest growing
economy. ANURAG SHAH, Porsche
Dealer: I'm very sure that this
will be the main hub in Africa
when it comes to the luxury
goods in near future. NICK
SCHIFRIN: Straight from Germany?
ANURAG SHAH: Straight from
Germany. NICK SCHIFRIN: Anurag
Shah sells Porsches that cost
600 times the average Nigerian's
annual salary. The ultra-rich
are growing at a higher
percentage here than in the U.S.
ANURAG SHAH: You have luxury
yachts, you have luxury
aircraft, you have luxury
wristwatches. Every luxury
business in Nigeria currently is
booming. NICK SCHIFRIN: It's not
only the rich. Between now and
2030, the middle class will grow
by a factor of eight. Their
spending power has made Nigeria
the world's largest consumer of
Guinness beer. MAN: This is what
I drink. This is Guinness.
That's what I like. MAN: In
Lagos here, you can see many,
many things. This is where you
can get what you want. I love
Lagos very well. NICK SCHIFRIN:
Half the country is under 30.
Smart young Nigerians have more
money, and they are starting
their own businesses. TONY
ELUMELU, Businessman: These guys
are entering the job market. So,
if you don't cater for these
guys, there's going to be
insecurity for everyone
everywhere in the world. NICK
SCHIFRIN: Tony Elumelu is one of
Africa's richest men. He is
trying to build the middle class
by investing $100 million of his
$700 million net worth in 10,000
young entrepreneurs. TONY
ELUMELU: The right, sustainable
way to intervene in Africa for
economic development, for
inclusive development is to
invest. ISAZODUWA AGBONENI,
Entrepreneur: When I started
initially, I did a free wash, so
people were actually attracted
to the place. NICK SCHIFRIN:
Isazoduwa Agboneni is one of
Elumelu's first entrepreneurs.
She calls herself Neni, as in
the founder and lead mechanic of
Neni's Auto Care. ISAZODUWA
AGBONENI: I was amongst the best
five in class. I was like, wow,
if I can do well among the guys,
so let me give it a try. NICK
SCHIFRIN: Neni's invested
$50,000 of her own money. Tony
Elumelu's money bought an engine
lift and will convert this hole
into a proper mechanic's pit. It
will make her team faster, and
allow her to hire more people.
ISAZODUWA AGBONENI: Doing this
type of thing is going to help
the unemployment rate in Lagos.
TITUS IGWE, Entrepreneur: My
name is Titus Igwe. TOBIAS IGWE,
Entrepreneur: My name is Tobias
Igwe. We are the Igwe twins.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Titus and Tobias
Igwe are also Elumelu
entrepreneurs. Five years ago,
the twins were mopping floors
when their father died suddenly.
They taught themselves how to
cook. TOBIAS IGWE: It was a
means of survival. We're doing
it because we want to survive,
because there was hunger. Hunger
is imminent. And there's no way
help will come. NICK SCHIFRIN:
Today, they run Speedmeals
mobile kitchen. Within a year,
they hope to cook and cater for
1,000 people a day. MAN: The
most important the part of the
part that we love the most, some
mouths are hungry. We get to
feed them. NICK SCHIFRIN: On
this day, they give away
packaged lunches to prospective
clients. And they feed about 100
churchgoers. They are always
smiling and always dreaming.
Elumelu's $10,000 rented this
new office space. MAN: We re
going to have computers in all
the rooms. MAN: We're going to
the moon with this place. That's
exactly what it means. NICK
SCHIFRIN: The twins use their
rags-to-riches story to motivate
and mentor younger
entrepreneurs. TOBIAS IGWE: We
intend to use the story to
encourage and inspire the next
generation. If the twins can
actually make it in this harsh
economy, in these same bad
conditions I find myself, who am
I? What is then my excuse? NICK
SCHIFRIN: And that's when the
mentees sound like the mentor.
TONY ELUMELU: Because your
success is not only success for
you and your family. It's
success for Africa. TOBIAS IGWE:
And that is the only way African
can grow, when young businesses
and entrepreneurs begin to
support other entrepreneurs.
Then the growth can be a chain
reaction. TONY ELUMELU: If you
succeed in employing 100 people,
1,000 people, you're playing
your own part. The fewer level
of poverty, abject poverty, we
have, the better for everyone.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But that poverty
is still everywhere. And the
wealth gap here is among the
world's largest. In elite
neighborhoods, tuk-tuk taxis
weave between mansions, and
share the road with luxury
Mercedes SUVs. The rich build
houses that literally look down
on the poor, who are getting
poorer. In 1980, the poverty
rate was 27 percent. By 2010, it
was 69 percent, even though the
country's wealth has increased
dramatically. Nigeria may be
Africa's richest country, but
here in Lagos alone, there are
more than 100 slums, including
this one. This is known as
Makoko, where the houses are
literally built on stilts on the
water. Across the country, more
than 100 million people don't
have toilets. And only 2 percent
have running water. FELIX MORKA,
Activist: So, the people live
below the poverty line, because
-- not because they are less
citizens of this country, not
because they are less deserving,
but because the government is
failing to provide those
services. NICK SCHIFRIN: Felix
Morka is a community organizer
for Makoko's 200,000 residents.
The water here is filthy and
smells of sewage. And yet young
residents learn to swim before
they can walk. FELIX MORKA: When
the government that is supposed
to provide those services is not
providing those services, then
obviously what you have is a lot
of deprivations. There's no
potable water. There's no access
to health care, primary health
care. The schools are completely
private. There's no official
presence in Makoko. NICK
SCHIFRIN: Morka accuses the
government of rallying around
the rich and penalizing the
poor. Three years ago,
government-paid thugs tried to
drown Makoko, so it could be
replaced with a fancy boat club.
FELIX MORKA: You see a lot of
wood stumps sticking out of
water. This used to be the
foundation of a house, one of
the houses that was sliced down
by the demolition squad. It was
simply an unleashing of violence
on the community. NICK SCHIFRIN:
While the government targeted
Makoko, it endorsed what
developers hope becomes Lagos'
and Africa's premier address.
DAVID FRAME, South Energyx
Limited: Nigeria and
specifically Lagos today is
where China was three to four
decades ago. NICK SCHIFRIN:
David Frame has lived in Nigeria
for 30 years. He hopes Eko
Atlantic City is his legacy.
DAVID FRAME: Eko Atlantic City
could be that catalyst to
establish Lagos as that
financial hub for the entire
continent of Africa. NARRATOR:
In the heart of this iconic
city, rises the new financial
hub of Lagos. DAVID FRAME: Slick
promotional videos envision a
city of the future, four square
miles, nearly the same size as
Midtown Manhattan, all built on
land reclaimed from the Atlantic
Ocean with 140 million tons of
sand. Eko Atlantic is Africa's
largest construction project.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In 10 years, what
is all this going to be? DAVID
FRAME: All the water that you
see, from here to the shore,
will be reclaimed. So, this will
be part of Eko Atlantic. NICK
SCHIFRIN: This is building for
the rich on the world's poorest
continent; 400,000 people will
live and work here. They have
already sold nearly every plot
without any government money.
DAVID FRAME: And our model is,
live in Eko Atlantic, work in
Eko Atlantic, and enjoy the
facilitates in Eko Atlantic.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The most
important part of Eko Atlantic,
in fact, the only reason it can
exist, are these rocks. They're
called the Great Wall of Lagos.
And that is what prevents the
Atlantic Ocean from coming in
and reclaiming the land. The
wall will be 5.5-miles-long, and
weigh 4.5 million tons. It will
keep Eko Atlantic dry, and keep
Lagos safe from erosion. DAVID
FRAME: Whatever the ocean can
throw at us, and including the
projected rises in sea level, to
the end of the century, this
wall will protect Eko Atlantic.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Eko Atlantic's
chief developer is Gilbert
Chagoury. He and his family are
the embodiment of Nigeria's
well-heeled and well-connected.
He holds an honorary
ambassadorship. And he donated
more than a million dollars to
the Clinton Foundation. Two
years ago, Clinton and Nigeria's
most senior politicians
christened the new city. BILL
CLINTON, Former President of the
United States: They have
reclaimed five million square
meters of land from the sea.
This is something, I'm telling
you, there will be countless
numbers of people coming here to
study. NICK SCHIFRIN: The
construction is not without
controversy. Before Eko Atlantic
could be built, the government
evicted residents who used to
live on the beach. Frame says
the neighborhood is better for
it. DAVID FRAME: The police
would attribute a lot of the
crime that was going on in the
area to people living in those
camps. So, it was very necessary
to move them out. NICK SCHIFRIN:
But Morka, and those who
advocate for the poor, believe
Nigeria's priority should be
building equity, not new cities.
FELIX MORKA: Your need effective
balance. You must ensure that
whatever policy that drives Eko
Atlantic City drives even
further for the millions of
people who are left behind.
Unless that is done, it becomes
a very skewed development policy
that advances the interests of a
few, to the detriment of the
majority. NICK SCHIFRIN: In 35
years, there will be more
Nigerians than Americans. For so
many here, there's so much
promise and so much pain.
Building the economy and
bridging the wealth gap could
change the city, the country,
and the continent. Nick
Schifrin, "PBS NewsHour," Lagos,
Nigeria. JUDY WOODRUFF: Tune in
tomorrow night for the next
story in our "Nigeria: Pain and
Promise" series about the
nation's crippling corruption.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us. Coming
up on the "NewsHour": how an
author and Marine explains war
to those he loves; and what is a
cow's carbon footprint, how
cattle are impacting climate
change. Now we return to
Chicago, where Mayor Rahm
Emanuel fired his longtime
police superintendent, Garry
McCarthy, earlier today. The
move comes exactly a week after
the city released this dash-cam
video showing officer Jason Van
Dyke fatally shooting
17-year-old Laquan McDonald. He
fired at the teen 16 times. Only
now, more than one year after
the shooting, has Van Dyke been
charged with first-degree
murder. The video sparked
outrage and protests across the
city and calls for a shakeup
within the police department.
Before the mayor's announcement
this morning, The Chicago
Sun-Times called on its front
page for McCarthy's ouster.
Paris Schutz of WTTW Chicago has
been covering the fallout and he
attended today's press
conference. Welcome, Paris. So,
I have to ask you the first
obvious question. What did Garry
McCarthy know, and when did he
know it? PARIS SCHUTZ, WTTW:
Well, Garry McCarthy had seen
the video before the rest of the
public had seen the video. It's
questionable what he knows
overall about the case. The
reason for his firing was
because public outcry had gotten
so heated, not only from
protesters, but from, as you
said, The Sun-Times and from
African-American aldermen who
were about to take a vote of no
confidence in McCarthy. Now,
McCarthy says his hands were
tied, that he had removed Van
Dyke once he had seen this
video, but because of union
contracts with the Fraternal
Order of Police, he couldn't
actually fire McCarthy from his
job. But, today, McCarthy is the
fall person, and he's out of his
job. GWEN IFILL: So, as far as
we know, there wasn't
necessarily wrongdoing, but it
was the optics of the situation.
I mean, just this morning, Garry
McCarthy was on morning
television in Chicago. He seemed
to be secure in his job. PARIS
SCHUTZ: He was. And even last
night, I had asked the mayor's
office whether they are going to
announce the firing of McCarthy,
and they said, no, they are
going to announce the creation
of a new task force. But there
were so many questions about not
just the shooting, but the
aftermath, why the initial
narrative from that crime scene
said that McDonald had been
lunging at police officers and
threatening them, while they
clearly weren't doing that, if
you look at the video, and why,
overall, there seems to be this
culture of protecting cops and
not disciplining them. McCarthy
had also protected the job of
another cop, Dante Servin, who
while he was off duty had shot
an innocent woman. And the
state's attorney, Anita Alvarez,
the Cook County's state
attorney, had brought
manslaughter charges against
that cop. The judge acquitted
the cop and said you should have
brought murder charges. McCarthy
defended that job -- and kept
that cop on the job for several
years. So, it's -- this has been
fomenting for a long time, and
the McDonald case was sort of
the final straw for many people
in the community. GWEN IFILL:
Well, there are also questions
about the mayor's political
livelihood at this point. Are
those questions still alive
tonight? PARIS SCHUTZ: I think
he's done an effective job
tampering down the calls for his
resignation, but clearly this
isn't going to be enough. Now,
there is a lot of anger at the
mayor, because he -- the city
was aware that this video
existed months and months and
months ago. They settled with
the McDonald family in February
for $5 million because they saw
how bad the video was. But the
mayor's administration fought
back dozens of freedom of
information requests from
reporters and the public to get
that video out. They said it was
because there was an ongoing
federal investigation, state
investigation into this officer,
and releasing that video would
compromise those investigations.
But a lot of protesters and
onlookers believed that the
mayor was trying to save his
political future. He was in the
midst of a very heated runoff
election, so there's a lot of
anger at him still, too. GWEN
IFILL: And briefly, also, Paris,
this task force that was formed,
they're bringing in the former
Massachusetts governor, Chicago
native Deval Patrick, to run it.
Does anybody have any confidence
in this task force? PARIS
SCHUTZ: I think the initial
reaction to this task force was
incredulity, that this was all
the mayor was going to do to
respond to this. Remember, the
mayor hasn't said anything
public about this case since the
video surfaced a week ago. I
think what most people want,
lawyers, editorial boards, is an
independent federal
investigation into the police
department. Why is it that so
few officers are disciplined?
Only 3 percent of officers that
have complaints against them end
up getting disciplined. And I
don't think at this point the
public really trusts the
independence of oversight until
it comes from someone like the
feds. GWEN IFILL: Paris Schutz
of WTTW in Chicago, thank you
very much. PARIS SCHUTZ: Thank
you. JUDY WOODRUFF: Now another
installment in our series of
"NewsHour" essays. Essays are
part of a long tradition at the
"NewsHour," and in the coming
weeks and months, we hope to
bring you a range of voices as
varied as the ideas they will
share with you. Tonight, as the
U.S. steps ups its military role
in Iraq and Syria, we hear from
Phil Klay, who served as a
Marine in Iraq and is the author
of "Redeployment," a collection
of short stories. It won the
National Book Award for Fiction
in 2014. PHIL KLAY, Author,
"Redeployment": In January 2007,
I arrived at a base on the banks
of Lake Habbaniyah in Iraq's
Anbar province. At the time,
Anbar was the lost province, the
heart of the Sunni insurgency.
It was a tremendously violent
place. In one of those early
months, I set up a video
teleconference call between some
soldiers and their families back
home. These soldiers were at the
end of a 16-month deployment. It
was only supposed to have been
12 months, but they'd been
extended, so a year to the day
after they arrived, they were
still patrolling the banks of
Lake Habbaniyah. And it was on
one of those patrols that they
lost two soldiers to an IED.
They recovered the bodies,
mourned their dead, and kept
patrolling through a desert that
seemed full of violence and
devoid of hope. Before they got
on air, a discussion broke out
about what exactly they should
tell their families. They
couldn't tell the truth about
how they felt. Their families
were worried enough. Instead,
they'd tell them proud,
uplifting things. "We can tell
them the truth when we get
home," one of the soldiers said.
It was quiet a moment, and then
another asked, "Will we even
tell them the truth then?" Not
long after, that unit returned
home and another took their
place doing the same mission,
patrolling the same banks of
same Lake Habbaniyah, except
they didn't come into Anbar, the
lost province. They came into
the Anbar awakening, right in
the middle of the surge. Instead
of 16 months of a seemingly
endless grind of pointless
violence, they spent seven
months watching insurgent
attacks plummet, markets open
up, and local police forces
swell. When they came home, they
probably knew exactly what to
tell their families: We're
winning. Well, it didn't last.
We Americans tried to wash our
hands of Iraq, pulling out, not
interfering after the 2010
elections, only to watch the
unraveling of the fragile
stability that had been
achieved. Operation Iraqi
Freedom may have ended, but
Operation Inherent Resolve, our
current military effort
overseas, continues on. I wonder
what the situation looks like to
troops in Iraq right now. I
wonder what they're telling
their families. And I wonder,
what do I say to my family now?
What, when my son is old enough,
do I tell him about my war? I
volunteered, after all. All of
us did. That's how we wage war
now. A fraction serves, and a
majority decides in hindsight
which politician to blame it on.
Most of us joined with the hope
of making a positive difference
in the world. Few of us, I
think, got exactly what we asked
for. Whatever we were thinking,
part of joining the military is
about risking yourself for a
higher purpose. You don't get to
decide the broad course of
history, only your role within
it. I wish I could evade
responsibility for all that's
gone wrong in Iraq and only
think about the sacrifices of
those I served with, the heroic
efforts, the courage of the
Iraqis I met, the lives of both
Iraqis and Americans saved by
the medical staff at my base. I
wish I could only think about my
deployment and how it ended,
full of hope. But I can't. I'm
an American citizen,
responsible, just like every
other citizen, for every part of
the war, not just how I felt
about the end of my part. In a
democracy, everyone shares
responsibility. Troops don't
issue themselves orders. War is
paid for by our tax dollars and
ordered by politicians we as a
people need to hold accountable.
So, I guess this is what I will
tell my son. I will tell him
it's my job now and until I die
to be an informed citizen. I
will tell him about joining
institutions, government or
otherwise, that are working for
a better world. I will tell him
about failure. And I will tell
him about the necessity of
attempting to change the world
and the necessity of facing the
consequences when you try. JUDY
WOODRUFF: We will be back with a
look at cows and climate change.
But, first, take this moment to
hear from your local PBS
station. It's a chance to offer
your support, which helps keep
programs like ours on the air.
(BREAK) GWEN IFILL: While world
leaders meet in Paris to try to
agree on a plan to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, it
turns out one culprit can be
found in our food supply. The
United Nations says 14 percent
of manmade greenhouse gas
emissions come from raising
livestock, including the fuel
and fertilizer it takes to grow
feed and the waste animals
create themselves. But not all
carbon footprints are created
equal. Eight percent of all
livestock emissions come from
poultry; 9 percent come from
pork; 40 percent come from beef
cattle. As Grant Gerlock at
Harvest Public Media reports,
ranchers and the farmers are
looking at ways to reduce the
beef and cattle industry's
impact on the climate. GRANT
GERLOCK, Harvest Public Media:
Its breakfast time at the J&S
Feedlot, where they're serving
up hay and corn to 4,000 hungry
cattle. JOAN RUSKAMP, J&S
Feedlot: There's an exact amount
of pounds that each pen will
receive. Younger cattle that are
growing have more hay and less
corn. Cattle that are finishing
and putting on more muscle are
getting more corn and less hay.
GRANT GERLOCK: In only six
months' time, they can pile on
around 1,000 pounds of meat.
Joan Ruskamp says the secret is
their stomach. JOAN RUSKAMP: So
they're eating all these things
I don't want to eat and they're
giving me a great burger, a
great steak, a great roast to
eat in the end. GRANT GERLOCK:
But the same cow stomach that
turns corn into meat also has a
troubling side effect. As they
eat corn or grass, cattle
regurgitate methane, a
greenhouse gas many times more
powerful than carbon dioxide. In
fact, when it comes to global
greenhouse gas emissions, cattle
are one of the worst offenders.
THOMAS HERTEL, Purdue
University: If you look globally
and you just compare every
sector, I'm talking electric
utilities, steel, automobiles,
beef, globally, beef is at the
top, OK, the highest emissions
per dollar of output, higher
than electric utilities
globally. GRANT GERLOCK: The
cattle industry is trying to get
a grip on how to reduce that
footprint. Kim Stackhouse-Lawson
is the sustainability director
for the National Cattlemen's
Beef Association. KIM
STACKHOUSE-LAWSON, National
Cattlemen's Beef Association:
Seventy percent of beef's carbon
footprint actually happens on
the ranch at the cow/calf level.
GRANT GERLOCK: Stackhouse-Lawson
says, in a way, the U.S.
actually has a head-start over
the rest of the world when it
comes to controlling the carbon
footprint of cattle, and that's
because U.S. feedlots are the
most efficient at turning pounds
of feed into pounds of beef. KIM
STACKHOUSE-LAWSON: Cattle have
gotten bigger. That's from
genetic improvements, so we have
been very focused on maximizing
resource use. GRANT GERLOCK: Go
back 50 years to 1965. At that
time, a steer went to slaughter
weighing right about 1,000
pounds. Today, with better beef
genetics and nutrition, that
same animal weighs over 1,300
pounds. With fewer cattle, the
U.S. still produces 30 percent
more beef. If the rest of the
world was as efficient as the
United States, it would go a
long way in cutting global
emissions from beef. But not
every country can grow feed like
the Midwest. And some believe
the current system relies too
much on fields of coy and
soybeans that add to the
environmental cost.. They want
to move beef away from feedlots
and row crops. DEL FICKE,
Rancher: We're rewriting
history. We want to change the
way things are done. And we want
to do it with a group of cattle
that fit with our nature
situation and for a lot of other
people's. Come on. Let's go,
girls. GRANT GERLOCK: Del Ficke
raises cattle in Southeastern
Nebraska. They never go to a
feedlot. Instead, they start and
finish their lives feeding on
pasture designed to grow on
grass, not grain. DEL FICKE:
They're engineered to do
everything on forage like cows
were intended. GRANT GERLOCK:
The switch to grass-fed beef was
a huge change for Ficke. Until a
couple years ago, he farmed
7,000 acres of corn and soybeans
and fed cattle in a conventional
feedlot. Now he's down to around
500 acres, nearly all grass. DEL
FICKE: You can have more cows,
more pounds and do it in a way
that is better for the
environment if you use the right
genetics. GRANT GERLOCK: Ficke
says keeping cattle on grass
takes crops like corn and
soybeans out of the picture,
along with the fuel and
fertilizer needed to grow them.
That cuts carbon emissions.
Also, planting prairie where
crops used to be pulls excess
carbon out of the air and stores
it in the soil. DEL FICKE: This
was all cropland. And this would
be highly erodible land. GRANT
GERLOCK: Its true grass-fed
cattle do a lot to save carbon.
But strictly in terms of
greenhouse emissions, they're
still at a disadvantage. Kim
Stackhouse-Lawson says it's
because of efficiency. At the
feedlot, she says a calf is
ready for slaughter by the time
it's 18 months old. KIM
STACKHOUSE-LAWSON: If we were
grass-finishing an animal, they
might be anywhere from you know
2 to 2.5 years old before they
reach the same finished end
point. GRANT GERLOCK: Since
grass-fed cattle have more time
before slaughter, they typically
have a larger footprint. But
Stackhouse-Lawson says, at the
same time, keeping cattle on
pasture provides benefits for
wildlife habitat and water. KIM
STACKHOUSE-LAWSON: A
grass-finish system might have a
smaller water footprint,
because, oftentimes, irrigation
is used to water crops. So, it's
a tradeoff, and it's about
balancing those tradeoffs. GRANT
GERLOCK: There are different
ways to meet the growing
appetite for beef in the U.S.
and abroad, and they each have
something to offer. Feedlots are
efficient. JOAN RUSKAMP: The
whole reason I'm here doing this
is to feed people. GRANT
GERLOCK: Grass is green. DEL
FICKE: Just let the cow be a
cow. GRANT GERLOCK: But that's
the challenge for the beef
industry in a climate-conscious
world, finding a way to meet
that demand while keeping the
carbon footprint of cattle in
check. For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Grant Gerlock in Lincoln,
Nebraska. JUDY WOODRUFF: On the
"NewsHour" online: The company
known for affordable household
wares and ready-to-assemble
furniture is using its design
chops for a philanthropic
mission: building shelters for
refugees. The Swedish superstore
Ikea is now making refugee
housing with doors that actually
lock and solar panels. See what
they look like and how they're
being implemented at refugee
camps. That's on our home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour. GWEN IFILL:
And tune in later tonight.
Charlie Rose sits down with
Hillary Clinton for an hour-long
conversation. And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight. On
Wednesday, I talk with the head
of the World Bank, just back
from Paris, on the economic
challenges of climate change.
I'm Gwen Ifill. JUDY WOODRUFF:
And I'm Judy Woodruff. Join us
online and again right here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
at the "PBS NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.